ZEP 2 - Sharding storage transformer (#1)
scalableminds/zarr-zeps: draft/ZEP0002.md

---
layout: default
title: ZEP0002
description: This ZEP proposes to add a sharding storage transformer to
  the Zarr specification version 3. This allows 
parent: draft ZEPs
nav_order: 1
---

# ZEP 2 - Sharding storage transformer

> Authors:

Author: @normanrz Passt es, wenn ich dich auch mit draufnehme?

Reviewer: Yes, please!

> * Jonathan Striebel ([@jstriebel](https://github.com/jstriebel)), Scalable Minds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jonathan Striebel ([@jstriebel](https://github.com/jstriebel)), scalable minds
```

afaik

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2022-07-29

This ZEP is accompanied by the sharding extension specification [[SHARDINGSPEC](#ref-SHARDINGSPEC)].
A public review of the specification is done in PR **TODO**.

## Abstract

> This ZEP proposes a new major version of the core specification which

Reviewer: Das is noch von ZEP1 kopiert?

Author: Yep, updated it now

defines how to store and retrieve Zarr data. The ZEP also proposes a
new framework for modularising specifications of codecs, storage
systems and extensions.

## Motivation and Scope

> Currently, Zarr maps one array chunk to one storage key. This becomes a bottleneck as storing large

Reviewer 2: incomplete sentence?

In many cases it becomes inefficient or impractical to store a large number of chunks directly as
files or objects due to the design constraints of the underlying storage.
For example the file block size and maximum inode number restrict the usage of numerouos small files
for typical file systems, also cloud storage such as S3, GCS, and various distributed filesystems
do not efficiently handle large numbers of small files or objects.

Increasing the chunk size works only up to a certain point, as chunk sizes need to be small for
read and write efficiency requirements, for example to stream data in browser-based visualization software.

Therefore, chunks may need to be smaller than the minimum size of one storage key.
In those cases it is efficient to store objects at a more coarse granularity than reading chunks.

**Sharding solves this by allowing to store multiple chunks in one storage key, which is called a shard**:

![sharding schema](../assets/images/sharding.png)

The following example illustrates the need for sharding:

> The dataset has a shape of `(25000, 18000, 6000)` and a dtype of `uint8`. This makes for a total size of 2.4TB. For efficient reads and fast streaming of the data, e.g. to a browser-based interface, chunk sizes should be of max. `(64, 64, 64)`. For this dataset that would result in 10.3M chunks, and withouth sharding also to 10.3M files. Considering even many of these datasets, the number of files becomes impractical. With sharding, one could use shards of size `(2048, 2048, 2048)` which would each contain `(32, 32, 32)` chunks. That would reduce the number of files to ~300, while maintaining a practical write granularity.

Reviewer 2: "considering even many of these" sounds weird in my ears. maybe paraphrase?

> The dataset has a shape of `(25000, 18000, 6000)` and a dtype of `uint8`. This makes for a total size of 2.4TB. For efficient reads and fast streaming of the data, e.g. to a browser-based interface, chunk sizes should be of max. `(64, 64, 64)`. For this dataset that would result in 10.3M chunks, and withouth sharding also to 10.3M files. Considering even many of these datasets, the number of files becomes impractical. With sharding, one could use shards of size `(2048, 2048, 2048)` which would each contain `(32, 32, 32)` chunks. That would reduce the number of files to ~300, while maintaining a practical write granularity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dataset has a shape of `(25000, 18000, 6000)` and a dtype of `uint8`. This makes for a total size of 2.4TB. For efficient reads and fast streaming of the data, e.g. to a browser-based interface, chunk sizes should be of max. `(64, 64, 64)`. For this dataset that would result in 10.3M chunks, and without sharding also to 10.3M files. Considering even many of these datasets, the number of files becomes impractical. With sharding, one could use shards of size `(2048, 2048, 2048)` which would each contain `(32, 32, 32)` chunks. That would reduce the number of files to ~300, while maintaining a practical write granularity.
```

Reviewer: Wird die "shard size" in voxel oder in chunks angeben?

Author: In der config gibt es einfach nur `chunks_per_shard`, in dem Beispiel hab ich es jetzt klarer formuliert.

> Sharding could be implemented directly in the storage layer, but to allow interoperability between different stores and Zarr implementations, it is important to be able to consistently adress array data within a store. Therefore, standardizing the sharding format across different stores is crucial for interoperability, which is possible by implementing sharding as a storage transformer.

Reviewer 2: this paragraph feels a bit out of place in the the "Motivation and Scope" section. maybe paraphrase to highlight the requirements more and mention the consequences for the implementation as a secondary detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sharding could be implemented directly in the storage layer, but to allow interoperability between different stores and Zarr implementations, it is important to be able to consistently address array data within a store. Therefore, standardizing the sharding format across different stores is crucial for interoperability, which is possible by implementing sharding as a storage transformer.
```

Author: I shortened it to a single sentence, this is already a bit doubled with the latter `Shardings as a storage transformer extenion`.

## Backward Compatibility

This ZEP introduces a Zarr extension for Zarr version 3. The sharding
extension is optional for data producers, and only necessary when reading
arrays that are written using the sharding extension. It corresponds
to a minor version change in semantic versioning, adding functionality
in a backwards compatible manner.

## Detailed description

### Combining regular blocks of chunks in a shard

To add sharding to Zarr, data that was stored previously as separate objects must be combined.
Different strategies can be considered when sharding array data, such as:
1. sharding across single dimensions,
2. sharding by regular n-dimensional blocks of data, and
3. sharding random combinations of chunks via hashing.

> All of those strategies only shard the array-data, both as metadata must first be read without
> sharding, so that sharding itself can be configured in the metadata, and also since the relevant
> parts of the data is the array data itself.

Reviewer 2: might be a matter of taste, but I think this can be put a bit more clearly. Something like this:

```suggestion
All of those strategies only shard the array-data and not the metadata, since the latter is not big enough to warrant sharding and also because the sharding configuration is stored in the metadata.
```

Strategy 2 is a strict super-set of strategy 1, as sharding across a single dimension can
be produced by sharding with n-dimensional blocks where all blocks consist of single chunks
except for the selected dimension.

Strategy 3 allows to balance loads better between shards than the other two strategies. However,
sharding is not meant to distribute loads in this case, since all shards will mainly be served

> via the same underlying storage, but it instead reduces the number of stored files or objects.

Reviewer 2: this paragraph is not very clear to me. what kind of load? currently, the paragraph says  `X allows to do Y, but it's not meant to do Y. instead, it does Z`. should the last statement say `instead, it *should` do Z`?

> Comparing strategy 3 and 2, in opposite to the load balancing, it is more important to co-locate
> data that us usually accessed together or in short succession. This is optimized by combining
> multiple chunks that are close to each other, what is supported best by strategy 2, using
> regular n-dimensional blocks of chunks as sharding units.

Reviewer 2: this paragraph could be a bit clearer. maybe:

```suggestion
When comparing strategy 3 and 2, it's important to note that it is less important to do load balancing than to co-locate
data that is usually accessed together or in short succession. The latter can be achieved by combining multiple chunks that are close to each other, which is supported best by strategy 2, using
regular n-dimensional blocks of chunks as sharding units.
```

Reviewer: I don't know if we have to be absolute about 2 being better than 3. For this proposal, we implement 2. Another storage transformer extension could choose to implement 3, if the use cases call for it.

Author: True, fair enough. I restructured the arguments a bit and think this is now more balanced.

### Shardings as a storage transformer extenion

Sharding can be an optional addition to the current Zarr features, as it is primarily important for
very large arrays. Therefore it should be added as an extension, which can enhance different Zarr
implementations.

Sharding by combining different chunks can only be implemented in logical units operating after

> chunking and indexing is done. Therefore could be implemented directly in the storage layer,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
chunking and indexing is done. Therefore it could be implemented directly in the storage layer,
```

but this could result in different sharding implementations between different stores and Zarr
implementations, compromising the core Zarr benefit of interoperability.

Therefore, sharding should rather be implemented as a storage transformer, which allows

> to consistently adress array data across different stores and ensures compatibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to consistently address array data across different stores and ensures compatibility
```

across implementations, by specifying an authoritative specification.

### Configuration

Sharding can be configured per array in the array metadata by specifiying the
following array metadata keys:
* `extension` must always be `"https://purl.org/zarr/spec/storage_transformers/sharding/1.0"`
  for this extension.
* `type` specifies a binary shard format. In this version, the only binary format is the
  `indexed` format.
* `configuration` contains only the following configuration key:

>   * `chunks_per_shard` is an array of integers providing the number of chunks that are combined in

Reviewer: What about border shards? I think we need to write somewhere how they are treated. (I assume the same index size as all other shards, but with a bunch of empty (`2^64 - 1`) chunk entries outside the border).

Author: It's written in the `Binary shard format` section:
> The index always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard, even if they are outside of the array size.

Do you think it should be part of the configuration section as well?

    a shard for each dimension of the Zarr array, where each chunk may only start at a position

>     that is divisble by `chunks_per_shard` per dimension, e.g. starting at the zero-origin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    that is divisible by `chunks_per_shard` per dimension, e.g. starting at the zero-origin.
```

    The length of the array must match the length of the array metadata `shape` entry.
    For example, a value `[32, 2]` indicates that 64 chunks are combined in one shard,
    32 along the first dimension, and for each of those 2 along the second dimension.

>     Valid starting positions for a shard in the chunk-grid are therefore `[0, 0]`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Some valid starting positions for a shard in the chunk-grid are therefore `[0, 0]`,
```

> ```
| chunk (0, 0)    | chunk (0, 1)    | chunk (1, 0)    | chunk (1, 1)    |
| offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes | offset | nbytes |
| uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 | uint64 |
```

> Empty chunks are denoted by setting both offset and nbytes to ``2^64 - 1``.
The index always has the full shape of all possible chunks per shard,
even if they are outside of the array size.

> The actual order of the chunk-content is not fixed and may be chosen by the implementation
as all possible write orders are valid according to this specification and therefore can
be read by any other implementation. When writing partial chunks into an existing shard no
specific order of the existing chunks may be expected. Some writing strategies might be

> * **Fixed order**: Specify a fixed order (e.g. row-, column-major or Morton order).
    When replacing existing chunks larger or equal sized chunks may be replaced in-place,
    leaving unused space up to an upper limit  which might possibly be specified.
    Please note that for regular-sized uncompressed data all chunks have the same size and
    can therefore be replaced in-place.

> > * **Append-only**: Any chunk to write is appended to the existing shard,

Reviewer 2: further above, the spec says that the index is placed at the end of the file. if append-only is done, does this mean, that there will be `old_chunks... old_index ... new_chunk ... new_index`? or, will `new_chunk` overwrite the `old_index` and the `new_index` is written from-scratch?
this is not super clear here.

    followed by an updated index.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * **Other format**: Other formats that accept additional bytes at the end of the file (such as HDF) could be used for storing shards, by writing the chunks in the order the format prescribes and appending a binary index derived from the byte offsets and lengths at the end of the file.

```

> Any configuration parameters for the write strategy must not be part of the metadata document,
they need to be configured at runtime, as this is implementation specific.

### Use-cases and examples

> #### Reading data per chunk

Reviewer 2: not sure whether this subsection fits the "use cases and examples" section :thinking:

Author: True, I simply renamed the section to `Use-cases and access strategies`

Reading single chunks can be done in two ways, depending on the capabilities of the underlying storage:
1. * Downloading the complete corresponding shard,
   * reading the index and
   * afterwards reading the relevant chunk.
2. * Downloading only the index of the corresponding shard,
   * identifying the relevant byte-range for the requested chunk,
   * only downloading this byte-range from the same shard.

The first method might especially be useful when caching not only the requested chunks but the whole shard,
which will save bandwidth if subsequent chunk-requests are close to the previous chunks.

#### Storing a stream of data slices

Many image acquisition techniques produce slice-wise data, such as timeseries or z-slicing. This data can
be written slice-wise using one of the following techniques:

> 1. Using a chunk-size and shard-size of 1 for the sliced dimension effectively disables chunking and sharding for it.

Reviewer 2: `for it` <-- what is `it`? the sliced dimension?

2. Slice-wise data with a chunk-size of 1 for the sliced dimension can be appended to a shard, only wasting the space
   for the index that was written before.
3. When using no compression, chunk-sizes are constant, and shard indices can be known ahead of time, allowing
   to write partial chunks of a shard. Therefore, a chunk-size of 1 can be used for the sliced dimension, in addition

>    to a higher shard-size for this dimension. This is beneficial if later access typically constists of blocks with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to a higher shard-size for this dimension. This is beneficial if later access typically consists of blocks with
```

   multiple slices.
4. Strategy 2 can be combined with compression by either

>    * compressing chunks after all slices of a "shard-layer" are written, or

Reviewer 2: what is a shard layer? the term `layer` was only used for the storage layer until this point.

Reviewer 2: simply one shard which represents a section (or slice)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * compressing chunks after all slices of a shard are written, or
```

Author: I updated the parts and called it "slice of shards" now instead.

>    * directly writing compressed chunks, but assuming a constant chunk-size for the index,

Reviewer: No need to waste any space, when writing a new shard index after appending a chunk:
`chunk_data ... index` -> `chunk_data ... new_chunks ... new_index`

Author: Good point, somehow I was assuming an append-only store.

     which results in unused space. This can be compacted after all slices of a

>      "shard-layer" are written.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     shard are written.
```

#### Updating chunks

Updating chunks can be done with different strategies, depending on the byte-length of the chunks and therefore
depending on the compression:
* Uncompressed chunks can be rewritten in-place, since their size is constant and the index does not need to be updated.

> * When updating compressed chunks one might also update the chunk in-place if the following
> index provides enough space, but the index must still be updated if the byte-length of the chunk changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When updating compressed chunks one can also update the chunk in-place if there is enough unused space between the chunk and the following chunk
(or index). However, the index must still be updated if the byte-length of the chunk changed.
```

unless I misunderstood the point.
